---
layout: post
title: EPBA and BIC Hold an Event in Jefferson County
author: esimon
date: '2015-08-03 00:00:00'
categories:
  - Opinion
tags:
  - Politics
---
There's a sign that is familiar to most of us as we cross the border on our way home to West Virginia from neighboring states. It says: "West Virginia - Open for Business". There are similar signs that dot the landscape as we drive from one county to another declaring the local county to be a "certified business location". I'm tempted to ask the rhetorical question: "Certified by whom?" However, it doesn't matter. The marketplace has its own way of certifying localities as to how open they are for business - or not. 

In CNBC's annual America's Top States for Business survey, West Virginia perennially lands in the bottom decile, ranking 49th in the most recent. Supporting that assessment are some grim statistics. At 7.4% for June, West Virginia currently has the highest unemployment rate in the nation - according to government statistics. Next are the District of Columbia and Nevada at 7.0% and 6.9% respectively. West Virginia also has the lowest workforce participation rate in the nation at 52.8%. During the 10 year census period ending in 2010, West Virginia became the first state in the history of the United States to record more deaths than births. This resonates with the common complaint that our young people, when they are ready to enter the work force, have to relocate to other states in order to find jobs. 

Ironically, many of the West Virginians who are gainfully employed see the "Open for Business" signs at the border daily as they return home from work at jobs located on the other side of that border. During his tenure as member of the faculty at West Virginia University, economist Russell Sobel edited a book entitled, "Unleashing Capitalism - Why prosperity stops at the West Virginia border and how to fix it". In Chapter 2 of the book Sobel and associate editor Joshua Hall write: "Fortune 500 firms butt-up against our state borders" and aerial photos are presented that show "striking differences between the two sides of our state line". Ironically, according to the book, the NewPage Corporation - formerly known as Westvaco (the West Virginia Pulp and Paper Company), "lies exactly on the other side of our border" in Maryland and MeadWestvaco located a plant just across the border in Virginia. 

In other words, as Sobel and Hall so aptly put, "Our signs may say ‘Open for Business', but our policies don't". That was then - Unleashing Capitalism was published in 2007 - this is now. While the legacy of decades of misguided state government economic policy remain - as evidenced in the aforementioned statistics - change may be in the offing. If the legislature can keep the momentum going from the progress made in the last legislative session there may some reasons for optimism. 

There are a couple of organizations, one state-wide and one local that are working to promote economic progress and they are holding a free event that is open to the public August 12th in Charles Town. The event is called the "Policy and Progress Forum" and will be held at the Skyline Ballroom of the Hollywood Casino at Charles Town Races. The forum is from 1:00 to 4:30 with a reception following. There is no charge for either, but it is suggested that you let them know you're coming by emailing an RSVP to mona@monakissel.com. Keynote speakers will be West Virginia Speaker of the House Tim Armstead, West Virginia Senate President Bill Cole and West Virginia Attorney General Patrick Morrisey. The event is presented jointly by the West Virginia Business and Industry Council (BIC) and the Eastern Panhandle Business Association (EPBA). 

The BIC has been touring the state participating in regional forums. Founded in 1982, according to its website it "consists of more than 60 West Virginia trade associations and businesses and represents more than 395,000 West Virginia workers across 26 separate industry categories" saying that "BIC members are foot soldiers for change whose goal is to enhance the business climate in West Virginia". Their website is www.wvbic.org. 

According to its website, www.wvepba.com, "the EPBA is an independent, non-partisan political action committee that strives to protect, preserve and advance free enterprise's goals of economic freedom and opportunity. Founded in 1991, we work for a stronger West Virginia by striving to improve the business climate of our state in general, and our panhandle in particular". It has been described as "a Chamber of Commerce with attitude" and for the record I am a member of both the local Chamber and the EPBA. 

This year's EPBA Chair is local businessman Jim Ruland. Catching up with Jim recently, he said, "We are a business organization with a political arm - not the other way around. Our membership is composed of business and community leaders that understand the key role that businesses play in job creation, economic prosperity and the quality of life for everyone". He also said that he is excited about the recent surge in interest in the organization stating that membership has more than doubled over the last couple years. Not too shabby. He added, "We are honored to be partnering with the Business & Industry Council for this event, it gives added testimony to the growing clout of the Eastern Panhandle". 

Everyone deserves the opportunity to succeed. It's pretty clear that the policies of the last several decades have created a climate that discourages opportunity in West Virginia. Our workforce participation rates and unemployment rates bear this out. It would be great for more West Virginians to be able to work in West Virginia. The recent legislative session was a modest but positive start. I'll be attending the Policy and Progress Forum on Wednesday (the 12th) to hear what the next steps might be. I hope to see you there. 

