---
layout: post
title: WV Budget Includes Tax Increases
author: esimon
categories:
  - Archives
tags:
  - Politics
date: '2016-06-01 00:00:00'
image: 'https://ucarecdn.com/50888e1a-b380-4cbe-b001-b17fc3807257/'
---
In a recent essay posted to the Mises Institute website, Lewellyn Rockwell writes, "In 2012, Barack Obama warned that the United States would fall into a depression if Ron Paul's plan to cut $1 trillion from the federal budget were enacted. Wait, I beg your pardon. It wasn't Obama who warned that budget cuts would lead to a depression. It was Mitt Romney. Romney went on to become the nominee of the self-described free-market party. An ideological rout is complete when both sides of respectable opinion take its basic ideas for granted."

The Mises Institute is a school of economics and Rockwell went on to frame his essay in economic terms – lamenting the victory of Keynesian economics over the free market approach. But there is a political side to his comments. All political parties currently seem to be grappling with what might best be characterized as an identity crisis. 

With regard to the rank and file, rebellion is in the air. There are millions of Democrats that now identify as Republicans and have switched parties to vote for Donald Trump. There are socialists that now identify as Democrats, but then I repeat myself (with apologies to Mark Twain) in order to vote for Bernie Sanders. There are Democrats and Republicans that now identify as Libertarians in order to vote for…hmmm…I'll get back to you on that one. But there are reports that Libertarian Party registrations were up 20 fold in May of this year as compared to last year. Go figure. 

Economics often trump politics and can even cause some on the left to come to their senses. How about this recent headline from Connecticut newspaper, the Journal Inquirer, "A realistic state budget punctures Governor Malloy's renown as liberal", an op-ed piece written by managing editor Chris Powell. Powell writes, "Just a few weeks ago Governor Malloy was a national hero of the Democratic Party and liberalism, a crusader for the liberal agenda…But now, according to some of the liberal analysts who had been celebrating him, the governor is actually a bum, a traitor to liberalism and the Democratic Party, because he engineered adoption of a state budget that raised spending modestly without raising taxes but required cutting hundreds of millions of dollars in spending…" Imagine that. 

Here in West Virginia the haranguing over the budget has also been contentious. Our state's budget just for the general revenue portion is $4.088 Billion. That doesn't include the highway fund or the large number of "special revenue" accounts the state maintains. The general revenue fund alone doles out over $2200 per man, woman and child in the state , but if you take into account other spending the total amount is many times higher. 

According to the Bureau of Labor statistics, in April there were 733,900 people in our state that had jobs (incidentally, that's down around 4000 from January). Doing the same calculation, every member of the West Virginia work force needs to kick in over $5500 each in taxes to fund the general revenue budget. Therefore, if you make the mean salary in our state of $39,000 you would have to fork over more than 14% of your gross income just to fund the state budget. That doesn't include federal or local taxes. For all of the folks that worry about "sustainability", the size of the West Virginia budget/state government is simply not sustainable. And as I've said before in this space, West Virginia does not have a revenue problem, it has a spending problem. 

Back in January the budget shortfall was pegged at $353 Million. More recently it had been pared to $270 Million. In another example of a party having an identity crisis, Republican leadership in the West Virginia legislature called for a tax increase to bridge the gap. The infighting got so intense that two Delegates, Pat McGeehan from the northern panhandle and Mike Folk from here in the Eastern Panhandle, his district is in nearby Berkeley County, were unceremoniously booted from the Republican caucus. From what I can gather, they were tossed because they reached across the aisle to Democrats to ask for their help in defeating the tax increase. It's a mixed up jumbled up shook up world. 

Word on the street is that the Democrats voted against the tax increase because they felt it wasn't enough. Whether or not that's the case, the end result is that although the senate passed the tax increase with the support of Republican leadership it ultimately failed in the house with help from the Democrats. You really can't make this stuff up. 

One of the members of the House of Delegates who voted against the tax increase is Jefferson County's Jill Upson. In speaking with her about it, she expressed consternation that Republicans had somehow been saddled with ownership of a tax increase that was proposed by Governor Tomblin, a Democrat. My take on that is that the party leadership got played like a fiddle. Said Upson, "I have long been committed to protecting our over-burdened taxpayers. It is very unfortunate that our governor is demanding a tax increase on working West Virginians at a time when we are losing over 1,000 citizens per year to other states. As a Republican I am fighting for conservative principles of low taxes and an efficient government and summarily reject the calls by our governor to place an additional burden on our tax paying citizens". 

Subsequently, the house passed a revised budget bill. Speaker Tim Armstead (R – Kanawha) posted on his Facebook page that it "fully funds key programs such as Promise Scholarships, K-12 education funding, health care and yes, avoids the ‘draconian' increases to co-pays and deductibles to Public Employees Insurance Agency (PEIA). The budget is not based on any tax increases. It relies on tens of millions of dollars in cuts, sweeping of excess funds throughout state agencies and $143 million in Revenue Shortfall funds. This is essentially the same amount of Revenue Shortfall funding included in the Budget passed by the Democrat controlled legislature in 2014".

Armstead added he hoped that the state senate would act quickly on the bill and the governor sign it. So it's all eyes on the senate and the governor for the coming week. There are some that believe the governor will veto the bill if it passes the senate. There are others that believe that the governor might exercise his line item veto. Stay tuned. 

In the meantime, Republican legislators, particularly party leaders need to be reminded that they are the party of smaller limited government and that West Virginians are taxed too much already. I hope that Senate President Bill Cole follows Speaker Armstead's advice. As for Governor Tomblin, let's find out if he really wants to be the one responsible for shutting down the state government. I'm hoping he has more sense than that. But first, the state senate needs to do the right thing. 

